In this video we're going to use white paint to paint the area where we want our hair to grow a really
powerful technique for getting a lot of control over your hair.
If you haven't done so already open up your head sculpt again we're going to be working in that first
thing you gonna do is click on the head means object No no I mean object mode click on head and shift
data duplicate yet right click to leave it in exactly the same position I'm going to rename this FROM
HEAD TO CALL IT head hair I'm also going to click on head hair and head and let's see I'm going to hit
em on my keyboard as opposed to em whatever else you want to hit it causes on the keyboard record you
talking about new collection on the keyboard.
Goodness me.
And rename this head so I can group them together because I'm gonna be working in both of those and
you know it just to be a little bit cleaner than I had been LET'S GIVE MY OTHER HEAD a capital H.
Okay.
Head and head here.
Right.
These are the two I'll be working in at the moment.
Next let's turn our visibility for a head.
So we're only seeing head hair.
Just check.
That's what we're looking at there.
Yes it is excellent.
Click on head hair.
Now the thing we need to do is reduce the complexity of this.
We don't need all of these vertices even.
Goodness me there's so much of them in there's so much detail so to do that I'll click on modifier add
modifier and find re mesh and re mesh allows us to reduce the complexity.
Now let me see I'll get on a more favorable view which will be my solid shading and that's kind of a
cool look.
To be honest I like the the political style the low poly style.
I'm a fan of that but that's not what going for at the moment.
If we click on smooth shading you'll see that we've got a pretty good likeness.
We don't need the year and we don't need the mouth.
All we need is the head.
That's the place of putting the hair.
I don't like that we've got a little bit these pumpkins at the top so going to change this setting the
oak tree up to five just to see.
That gives us the smoothness we're looking for right.
Yeah I think that's pretty good.
Again talk about the ease they can look a little bit odd doesn't matter.
Actually let's clear it up to six I think that's going to give us a little bit more detail without having
too many faces.
Eight thousand seven hundred and fifty compared with when we had the main head which is two hundred
and eighty thousand two hundred ninety thousand.
Okay that's good.
Click Apply.
Make sure we're on head hair quick apply.
Excellent.
That is now applied if we jump over into edit mode you'll see the topology here there's a reasonable
amount of detail that's good that's amount of detail we want it's pretty ugly it's not the sort of topology
that we'd want to use if we were trying to use the unwrap this is just for the purpose of generating
hair without having a bazillion vertices on there for completeness I'm going to jump in x ray mode and
just delete the shoulders because I don't need that delete and then faces just working in the head the
spot where we want hair to come out of technically we could go and get rid of all the inside faces and
the ease and stuff I'm not gonna worry about that for the moment if you wanted to clean it up more you
absolutely could.
Okay back into object mode let's find our particle properties add clicking the plus button rename this
to head hair Yep click on hair and when it comes out of everywhere reduce the hair.
This is where it's good to get the hair roughly the length you think the hair might be.
Now I in my photo over here have very short hair and I was tempted to do this lecture with trying to
get that accurate hair but I'm conscious that many people.
If you're working on yours you might want to have slightly longer hair than that and it gives us some
more interesting things to do so for the purpose of just this video I'm gonna make the head a hair a
little bit longer.
This is not me trying to pretend I've got longer hair it's just me trying to make this tutorial a little
bit more interesting than if I have my little stubbly hairdo in there and the number I'm gonna reduce
down to 500 for now just to see how that goes.
Now it's going all over the face we don't want that.
Now we could turn the number down to zero.
Jump over into particle edit add in a new hair boink and then use the simple children to have the hair
clump around that using the radius to have it tighter or less tight.
That's one way to do it.
There's another way I'm going to show you now which is pretty cool for the specific thing we're trying
to do so let's undo those steps.
Get to the point where I've got my 500.
Yep excellent 500 today.
We're going to paint some weighting onto here to say where the hedge the hair should or should not be.
First thing we need to do is to go down to the object data properties click on that and you can see
vertex groups click plus to create a new vertex group.
I'm going to double click or F2 and rename this to hair now over into my particle properties when a
scroll down until we find vertex groups and you see under density we're going to click on the selector
and choose here.
Okay.
Nothing's happened just yet.
That's all fine and dandy we're about to do something cool.
Happy now mode selection select white paint.
And from here you can see we've got our brush.
I'm going to make my brush a little bit smaller.
We've got the weight and we've got the strength.
Now if we paint on top of the head you can see the hair is going to grow just where we've painted which
is real magic.
I think that would be such a quick way we've kind of played around before with creating some facial
hair just to go plump and there we go.
Then we've got facial hair perhaps in the spot that we want.
You know what this is stunning look like like a bit of a punk rocker guy but I'm going to undo all of
that undo undo undo and start to paint properly.
You notice as soon as we paint it goes from having the particles all over the object to just being where
we've painted it.
Now let me show you a little bit here strength we increase that up often that means that we will paint
quicker the coloring from this light blue to green the colors of the rainbow sort of matched up to red.
Show us that this is where it says yes 100 percent of the White 100 percent put hair here and then on
the outskirts saying it has less weight towards that for our purposes we kind of want hair or no hair.
So I'm to change the fall off to more of a sharper look this fall off look down the end Hey you don't
have to do this but I find it just gives a little bit of a crisper edge when I paint it.
You see the amount of extra blurriness is a little bit smaller just so it's tighter.
We can come back and tweak that later you can see it's very angular.
If you need to be exactly precise then you could go into edit mode and edit your vertices to get it
looking the exact way you want.
We shouldn't need to do that.
We can be in our white paint.
We can click on the next button down under white paint under the rush under draw sorry and blurred out
a little bit.
That should smooth that a little bit more make a little bit less less angular like that but again that
shouldn't matter too much with what we're doing for now we're just painting the White to say hairs should
or should not be able to go here.
Now it's a little bit tricky to see where to paint with this kind of blue look that we've got going
on here.
So what I'll do is within my particle properties I will find my viewport display and turn off show emitter
and then turn back on the head that allows us to paint directly over where the head is if I go to one
of my material or render views or we are to see this where I can see exactly I've already mapped out
where I want their hair to be going.
There's a whole lot of art affecting I got going on my screen here.
Don't worry about that that goes away.
I don't know why all the little black dots I don't know if you can see it on yours but I've got that
on mine.
So what I'm going to do is just go round and paint make sure I've clicked on head hair and then make
sure I'm on white paint and then as I paint it nothing happens.
Okay.
Sorry I just edited it a little bit of the video out and I probably clicked a few buttons that weren't
on before because let me put it back to what it was because I was just really trying to put down here
and it wouldn't work and that's because I was still on my blood all over here.
Don't make that same mistake as me.
Okay.
So let's just recalibrate what I want to do is to leave head on go into one of the views where I can
see where the hair should be putting my render view and just start to lay down the paint.
So I'm actually painting the weights and because the weights says OK I'm I'm saying hair should go there
I shouldn't go there then the hair is going there and we'll tidy up the hair and a little bit at the
moment it's just getting the shape for it
case I've got the edge of it.
Now let's just paint in the middle and increase my brush size
just finish it up in this mode so I can make sure I don't miss any bit so I've just changed it to solid
shade mode.
I've turned the emitter back on and I've turned the head object off so I can just very easily see the
rest of the paint here and I need to see the actual head itself
now you might get there and say ah no what have I done.
I've gone and painted too low down the back here.
Let me show you what to do if that's the case.
So I turn the emitter back on turn the head off.
So what I do is turn the white all the way down to zero.
It says paint a zero weight on top of the head.
So if I go and do a little bit of painting down here it will on paint.
What I've got so that's how to reverse the White painting.
If you need to reverse the White painting now back to object mode and let's see I'll turn off the emitter.
I will turn back on the head and we'll go add some children into interpolate.
There we go point.
We've got a whole bunch of hair.
So you've got the hair pretty much merit where we wanted it.
We've got a couple of these stragglers.
Now if you see the stragglers what's a better view.
There you go.
You can see that better.
See these guys are way out of place.
Let's go into particle edit and add some hairs right up near the front.
I'm going to change the count to 1 and just add them in pretty much the exact area that I want.
So when it comes to interpolate thing we've got the information this is really handy as well when you
want to style it.
And often the front of the head is going to be a very important part to style it.
And of course we could have just gone in hand placed all of the hairs right from the get go.
But I'd like to allow the interpolation to do a little bit of the work rather than hand placing everything.
Okay.
Just around the important parts around the ease I'm going to cut that one cut.
So it's gone.
Cut cut cut cut just turn around a little bit.
Okay cut.
That one was sticking out and I will add a couple here just around the ear and particularly if you're
working on female hair it's good to do a line of hair down the back and then brush it down another line
brush it down another line brush it down so you get that layered effect for me on my boof head here
I'm just kind of painting a whole bunch pretty consistent all over although technically this should
be a little bit of a patch missing there but as I said before we're can do this not necessarily accurate
to the way Rick actually is.
Okay.
Up into object mode.
We've got some hair let's just add some more children under display amount.
Let's make this 50 see how that looks and I'll put the render amount to the same so I don't have any
surprises.
Okay.
So then we have hair.
It's following exactly where I've painted my whites which is really quite lovely we can super easily
add more or subtract by just going into the White painting and adding and subtracting.
And the challenge I have for you is to set up white painting for the head you're working on create a
new head object by duplicating it.
And then Ramesh that to reduce the complexity use white painting to get your hair in the correct place
on the head and then get to the point where you're happy with the length and the position of the hair.
But don't worry about styling it just yet.
We'll be doing that in the next couple of videos.
OK.
So I pose a video and take on that challenge when you are done jumping to the next lecture and we'll
continue on with the process of making this hair look even better.
Learning a few new techniques.
OK see you in the next lecture.